# 4X4 sequence player

## Important notes for testers

while we were very careful to make it possible to edit while playing in Seq++, we have not done this for 4X4. Be prepared for occasional bad things to happen if you try this. Or avoid editing while playing back.

Also, unlike seq++, 4X4 has no special undo, other than what VCV provides for all modules.

To get the full CV features you need to treat the CV inputs as polyphonic. In many cases this means you need a merge module. Will probably make this easier in the future.

## Introduction

4X4 is a sequence clip player. Each pad contains one clip, and a clip can be an entire Seq++ song. 4X4 must be used with Seq++, as Seq++ provides a way to get music into 4X4, and a way to edit it.

Each row of pads in 4X4 can be considered a "track". There are 4 tracks.

There are two main things that 4X4 does. Firstly, it provides an easy way way to build up a song. Since each clip can be repeated by a specific count, it is very easy to put together "verse/chorus" arrangements.

The other main use of 4X4 is for live improvisation and mangling. There [will be] many ways to mutate the sequences under CV control.

## Definitions of terms

A **_clip_** is a series of notes, possibly polyphonic. There is a clip under each pad in the 4X4 UI. For comparison, the entire contents of a Seq++ instance is one clip.

A **_track_** is a series of clips. Each row of pads in 4X4 is a track.

A **_section_** is a group of clips all from different track. Often, all the clips in a **_section_** will play at the same time. A column of pads in 4X4 controls a **_section_**.

## The pads (visual display)

At the moment, all the fun is in the 16 pads that give 4X4 its name. Each pad displays quite a bit of information, and clicking on the pads makes different things happen.

The color of the pads will tell you many things about what is inside that pad:

* Light green: the pad has notes, and is playing.
* Dark green: that pad has notes, but it no playing.
* Light grey: The pad is empty, but has a duration (rest time), and is playing.
* Dark grey:  The pad is empty, but has a duration (rest time), and is note playing.
* Purple: The pad is selected. At most one pad at a time is selected.

In addition, the next pad to play will have a light grey outline.

Each pad displays a little information about the musical content in the pad. The first line displays the duration of the clip in bars:beats:fractions. The next line displays the loop iteration count for the clip. It defaults to one, but if it were three (for example) then the clip would play three times

## The pads (clicking on them)

Clicking on a pad selects it as the current pad. You can see this because the pad becomes purple. Current pad isn't particularly special, however. At the moment the only thing it does is direct keyboard input to that pad. So x,c,v will cut, copy, and past that pad.

Clicking in a pad also queues up all the clips in that column to be the "next clip". More on that later.

Ctrl-clicking on a pad will make that one selected, and queue that clip up to be next on its track, but will not affect other tracks.

Here's an example of "next play". If pad one is playing and you click on pad three, then pad one continue to play until it ends, then pad 3 will immediately start playing. By waiting until the end of a clip, everything can stay in sync much easier.

More on this later.

## Arrange mode

There are to main "use cases" for 4X4: composing a song, often with a verse/chorus structure, and improvising. Although all the same features support these use cases, they are often used a little differently, so we will expalain things separately to avoid confusion.

## Improv mode

## Remote editing

Seq++ may be used to edit the sequences inside 4X4. In order to do this you merely enable remote editing from the main context menu in Seq++.

Once remote editing is enabled, selecting any pad in 4X4 immediately sends that clip over to Seq++, where it may be edited with all the Seq++ tools. Selecting a different pad sends over a different clip.

One instance of Seq++ can edit more than one instance of 4X4.

Note: at the moment there is a bug - when you load a patch you will need to re-enable remote edit in Seq++.

## The pad context menu

Right clicking on a pad brings up a context menu for that pad.

**Repeat count** is the number if times the clip in that pad will be played before moving to the next pad. Note that "forever" is an option, and is very useful when using CV triggers to move between clips.

**cut/copy/paste** are what you would expect. They operate on the entire clip under a pad. So cut will always leave the pad empty. Paste is one way to get a clip into the pad.

## The stuff on the right

Top to bottom is CV 1 out (poly), Gate 1 (poly)... up to Gate 3.s

## The stuff on the left

**Clock Rate** is the same clock divider as Seq++.

**Polyphony** Like Seq++, you must set the desired polyphony for each track. There are four selecters, one for each track.

**Mystery CV inputs** There is a polyphonic CV input for each track. At the moment, each channel does something different, so in most cases you will need to use a VCV merge module to drive it. We will probably come up with a better solution later.

Note that there is an option for when these CV will take effect. They can take effect immediately, or they can take effect at the end of the current clip. There is a single setting for all tracks, and it is in the main context menu.

The currently implemented CV functions for each channel are:

0: trigger signal to advance to next clip. The rising edge of the signal will trigger a switch to the next clip for that track. This is similar to what happens when you click on a pad during playback.

1: trigger signal to go to the previous clip.

## How does playback work

[TBD]

## The clipboard

4X4 and Seq++ support the new portable sequence format, which allows notes to be cut and pasted between different VCV modules. It is currently supported by the Entrian and Impromptu Modular sequencers.

While doing this port we also changed and sometimes improved c/c/p between our modules.

Here are the new rules. Most of these apply only to Seq++:

When we copy something onto the clipboard, we usually just copy the selected note, and don’t remember the original time of the first note, nor the total track duration. This lets you copy from one location and paste in another. (it’s always been like this).

If you do “select all” before copying, however, we will copy the notes at their absolute start time, and remember the total duration. If you paste this into a new instance of Seq++ you will get an exact copy (well, read on).

Normally when we paste from the clipboard we paste the notes directly starting at the time where your cursor is. The track duration is only changed if it isn’t long enough - in that case we add full bars until the track is long enough. (Seq++ has always worked this way).

If you “select all” before paste, that is our cue to not ignore the duration of the original track. We will extend the track out to be that length. This means you can copy a track from one Seq++ to another with ctrl-a, ctrl-c then in the empty instance put your cursor on the first beat at ctrl-a, ctrl-v and it will paste an exact copy.

In 4x4, the paste is what Seq++ would do if you did ctrl-a, ctrl-v. So, to copy a full track from Seq++ to 4X4, ctrl-a, ctrl-c in Seq++, then click on a cell in 4X4 and press V.
