# F2 VCF

F2 VCF is designed to have some unusual sonic options and to use very little CPU. Most VCFs use a lot of CPU to try to ensure that they sound good when over-driven. F2 VCF, on the other hand, doesn't sound very good if it's over-driven, so we a) made it difficult to overdrive, and b) added some other unique options to take the sounds in some directions other filters may not go.

F2 VCF offers a choice of 12 or 24dB filter, and a choice of filter response. The 12dB setting, while not as "fat" as the typical 24dB ladder filter, is often a welcome break from more aggressive and fatter filters. And in 24dB mode F2 will roll-off a little faster than the typical ladder filter.

F2 VCF also has a unique control called "R". This works in any of the 24dB modes, and acts to "spread apart" the 24dB resonant peaks into two 12dB resonant peaks.

Because this VCF uses so little CPU compared to others, your can use very many of them. Don't hesitate to use them all over the place if you feel like it. Or use a whole bunch of them in a single voice.

## Some ways to use F2

Use it as a straight 12dB multimode filter. It's got all those different responses, and even as a low-pass it sound different from other filters.

Use it as a 24dB multi-mode filter. There aren't very many of these around offering true band-pass, high-pass and notch. Even our "Stairway", which does a lot of things, can't do this.

Use it as a 24dB filter with two resonant humps. Just put it in 24dB mode and turn the "R" control to move the resonances apart. Or control R with a CV. Try "Par" mode, which can make it easier to hear both peaks.

Use it as a dual notch filter. Put it in 24db/Notch mode, and turn up the R control to move the notches apart. Use different CV modulation to get phasing or vibrato sounds.

Use it as an LPG (or HPG, etc). Put it in "Par -" mode. It won't pass any sound at all until you put something into the "R" input. Patch an ADSR into the R control and F2 will act like a gate/filter. But it won't sound like every other LPG.

## The gain structure

As we mentioned before, you won't want to drive this filter super hard - the distortion is pretty uninteresting, and it will alias like crazy.

The easiest way to control the volume is to leave the limiter turned on. It also sounds really cool like this.

## The limiter

The limiter is not adjustable, it only has and on/off control. It has a fixed threshold, a fixed attack of 1 msec. and a fixed release of 100 msec. Being a limiter, the compression ratio in infinite.

## Controls

**Fc** Knob controls the center frequency of the filter. When R is turned up, Fc will move both of the peaks.

**Q** Filter resonance. Acts like other filters.

**R** increasing R breaks up the resonant peak into two resonant peaks. R is how far apart they are. Does not do anything with the 12dB filter setting.

**Limit** turns the built in limiter on and off. Usually you want to leave it on.

**Mode** offers four choices: Low-pass, Band-pass, High-pass, and Notch.

**Topology** offers four choices, 12dB, 24dB, Parallel, and Parallel difference. Note that the parallel is exactly the same as the 12dB, unless the R value is changed. Then it will produce two peaks. The effect of "R" is more obvious with the parallel topology.

Parallel difference mode is a little odd. Inside it's just subtracting the outputs of the two filters, but.... If R is set to zero, nothing will come out. This means you can gate the output using R. This is a little bit like an LPG in that the timbre will change as the volume shuts off.

## Some basic tips for getting sounds

You can get much more radical filter sweeps when the limiter is on. With the limiter off some of the frequency extremes won't catch many harmonics. But the limiter will bring this up. It's an unusual sound for a filter.

When experimenting with the R control, sweep the Fc control around. Since increasing R moves the larger frequency peak down, it sounds a little bit like the filter is closing, so you may need to open it up with Fc to get the effect. When learning about what R does, keep Q pretty high, and experiment with both the Fc and R controls. And remember that R does nothing in the 12db filter mode.

If you are trying to use F2 as a gate, you will probably want to turn the limiter off.
